All right, so let's start talking more about creating and using generic classes.
There's a link you can see on screen there and that'll take you to the class declaration
as specified by the Oracle Java 11 specification.
We have a quick look that I’ve got it on screen there in a browser,
but we'll swing back to the slides and talk more about that.
So, let's talk about a normal class declaration.
So, we've got class modifier, class type identifier,
type parameters, superclass, super interfaces,
and then the class body.
So, the type parameters section specified above is the part of the declaration
that makes a class generic.
A class is generic if it declares one or more type parameters.
The type parameter section follows the class name and is enclosed
in angle brackets.
At a minimum, a generic class would be declared as follows.
So, we've got public class GenericContainer
in angle brackets, then left to right curly braces.
So, what is T here?
Well, T in the above example is a type parameter
used as a placeholder for the type that will get assigned at runtime.
You can have more than one type parameter and they can be used anywhere,
a type would be used in a class with the exception
of using them in static members or declaring static variables to be these types.
Convention gives us the following standard type parameter codes.
Starting off with parameter code T, the meaning of that code is the Type.
This is the to be specified later type which the class contains at least one reference to.
The code E is an element of a collection
that's used by the collections API.
K as a Key, mainly used for map types.
And V, Value also used for map types.
N is a Number representing number types.
And we've got S, U, V… etc, but these are also Types
and basically additional types in a multi-parameter situation.
Now although the following doesn't follow convention,
it's not an error to define a class this way.
You can see that I've got class, generic class, and generic type in angled brackets.
The following examples demonstrate declaring local variables
using the generic class with different type arguments.
So, we've got generic class with string in angle brackets and name
generic string class,
there the generic class is typed to a string and in the second example,
we're using a number instead of a string.
And the terminology note here, the T
in GenericClass angled brackets  is a type parameter
and string in generic class string in angled brackets
is a type argument.
The following example demonstrates declaring and instantiating
local variables in a single statement.
There are several ways to do it.
The most specific way is to use a type argument
on both the declaration side and the instantiation side.
So an example here is generic class with string and angled brackets
with the name generic string is equal to new
generic class,
then we've got string in angled brackets again,
then left and right parentheses and obviously a semicolon to end the line.
But the compiler can figure out the type from the variable declaration,
so this is called type inference,
so you can use the following shorthand
omitting the type in the type argument
from the assignment side of the object
and using what is called the diamond notation instead
with string and angle brackets and the name generic string equals new generic class,
and then we've got the diamond or diamond operator by itself,
and then the parentheses and a semicolon.
Now, this is quite different from the next example I’m demonstrating below
which omits the diamond operator all together on the assignment side.
Now, this statement as you can see on the screen there creates an instance
of generic class without a type argument specified.
so this is called a raw type.
So, it is valid to do this but discouraged
and IntelliJ's compiler will flag it as a warning, unchecked assignment,
meaning the compiler isn't enforcing the type checking for the raw type.
So, in this case, the type is implied to be an object.
Although the declaration types it to string
and so the code generic class string and angled brackets generic string equals new
GenericClass (); parentheses semicolon.
You can also use local variable type inference to declare
and instantiate a variable as shown below.
var genericString equals new generic class
your string in angled brackets, then parentheses and a semicolon.
All right, so let's explore some of this in code.
We'll swing back to IntelliJ in our GenericsAndCollections project.
Let's create a new class and call it TestGenerics.
Paste in the code.
All right, so let's talk about this code.
So, we're creating a class here
called specifically typed class.
So, this is just an ordinary class declaration that has an instance field,
currentObj of type object, and a constructor
that accepts an object and sets the field to it printing its type.
Moving on down, we've got another class here, generically type class.
Here, I'm specifying that this is a generic class by specifying a type parameter T.
You can see that on line 28.
Instead of making the field currentObj an object,
I declare it with the type T, the generic type parameter line 31.
You can use the type in a method as a parameter type
as I demonstrate in the constructor of this class as well.
The test generics class as we move down,
it's got a main method which you can see there.
This instantiates three instances of the specifically typed class,
passing a string, a string builder, and an integer
using autoboxing.
It instantiates three instances of the generically typed class
using the type argument on the variable declaration but omitting it
when instantiating the object using the diamond or diamond operator instead.
Incidentally in Oracle's documentation, they do refer to it as the diamond,
but the diamond operator seems to be the term that most Java programmers use for this.
You can declare a local variable with LVTI,
the var you can see on line 71,
and specify the type argument when assigning a new instance
of the generic class to the variable,
specifying the type argument on the right-hand side of the assignment operator only,
in this example integer, you can see that on line 71.
All right, so running this code,
you might be asking at this point, what's the big deal about generics?
The result of executing the code seems relatively equal.
Well, let's explore this a bit further.
I'm going to append some more code to our main method.
So, as you can see, this pasted in code actually compiles,
but the comment gives away that the fact that there's going to be an error when we run it.
So, if we run this code,
you can see we've got a class cast exception there on line 77,
and this is because currentObj was set to a string,
and specifically looking at the class cast,
a string cannot be cast to a string builder.
So, you cannot guarantee that the object type you expected
is actually the type of the object that you'll get using a raw type
unless you build your own type-checking code.
And as an example there,
you could certainly do something like that, but firstly, this is unwieldy.
And second, all of this code would need to be maintained and changed
if a new type was introduced.
So, I'm going to undo that and the previous code I pasted it.
All right, so we're back with the code that we initially ran.
So instead,
let's do this. So, I'm going to type string s2
equals generic1
.currentObj – object.
So, this code is guaranteed to work without casting
because we made a contract with the code that only objects of type string
would ever be used in the generic1 instance.
If you need generic1, you can see it's set there on line 61.
All right, so adding some more code here.
And this gives us a compiler error and if we hover over the diamond over here,
cannot infer arguments.
The diamond operator can only be used
in an instantiation if the left-hand side is a declaration.
All right, so let's replace that line.
Now, this is also a compiler error.
And you can see incompatible types essentially.
Required type is generically type class
with string in angled brackets, but we've provided it as you can see in line 74
with a generically typed class of type string builder,
and this is because of course, we set up generic1
to be looking for a type of string again on line 61.
Let's try one more example here.
We've got another error here
implying that you can't use a string builder object in the constructor
where a string type has been specified for the instance of the generic class.
And you can see that it's looking for a string and we've provided it with a string builder.
So, here I've shown you two of the benefits of using generics in your code.
Firstly, eliminating the need to cast when working with the types which the container
class contains.
Secondly, moving the type error
from a runtime error to a compile-time error which of course is preferred.
No one wants to deploy code with inadvertent errors in it
and by forcing a type and therefore, a type check by the compiler,
you may prevent errors from occurring further down the development life cycle.
All right, so we're going to replace that line, generic1 with some more code.
Note that this doesn't generate a compile-time error,
but if we run it,
you can see we've again got a class cast exception on line 76.
String builder can't be cast to string.
So, what's this all about?
Well, Java permits you to assign a raw type
to a variable declared with a specific type,
but you really don't want to do this in practice.
The reason this is permitted has to do with backwards compatibility
and type erasure, which I'll discuss in a future video.
Let's just remove those two lines.
so that our code compiles again or rather. that it'll work again.
And I'm going to add a bit more code here now before we end the video.
So, you can see what I've done there using generic4,
so this is also a compiler error. So, you can't type a generic class with a primitive data type.
A type must be an object.
Autoboxing and unboxing make it possible to store and retrieve values that are wrappers
to the primitive data types, but obviously here is not working when we're trying to use generics.
All right, let's end the video in here, and in the next one,
I want to start talking about restrictions on generic classes.
See you in the next video.